Roles best practice (#989)
radiantearth/stac-spec: best-practices.md

## Table of Contents

* **[Web Best Practices](#web-practices)**
  * [Enable CORS](#enable-cross-origin-resource-sharing-cors)
  * [STAC on the Web](#stac-on-the-web)
* **[Item Best Practices](#item-practices)**
  * [Field and ID formatting](#field-and-id-formatting)
  * [Field selection and Metadata Linking](#field-selection-and-metadata-linking)
  * [Datetime selection](#datetime-selection)
  * [Unlocated Items](#unlocated-items)
  * [Representing Vector Layers in STAC](#representing-vector-layers-in-stac)
* **[Asset Best Practices](#asset-practices)**
  * [Common Use Cases of Additional Fields for Assets](#common-use-cases-of-additional-fields-for-assets)

>   * [Working with Media Types](#working-with-media-types)

Reviewer: Also applies to links?!

Author: It does, but that whole section is really focused on asset media types. I can rename the title to 'working with asset media types'. Or could move it, but not sure where - I'm mostly looking for the best way to 'group' things to help people navigate a bit. Links cuts across all of them...

* **[Catalog Best Practices](#catalog-practices)**
  * [Static and Dynamic Catalogs](#static-and-dynamic-catalogs)
  * [Catalog Layout](#catalog-layout)

>   * [Use of Links](#use-of-links)

Reviewer: Use of Links and Using Relation Types seems not so Catalog specific.

Author: I think it's the place they make the most sense, as it's where you do the majority of the linking. These are meant to just be rough groupings, not 'this only applies here'. I suppose we could make a 'general STAC best practices' section, but it's always going to be a bit fuzzy where to group things.

Author: #1006 to track this - reverted any grouping from this PR.

the role. And you are encouraged to add it to the list below and/or in an extension if you think the new role will have broader 
applicability. 

### List of Asset Roles

In addition to the thumbnail, data and overview [roles listed](item-spec/item-spec.md#asset-role-types) in the Item spec, there
are a number of roles that are emerging in practice, but don't have enough widespread use to justify standardizing them. So if
you want to re-use other roles then try to find them on the list below, and also feel free to suggest more to include here.

The 'source' field lists where the role comes from. The ones the say Item Spec are the only 'official' roles that are fully
standardized. In time others on this list may migrate to a more 'official' list. Those that say 'best practice' are just from this 
doc, the listing is the table below. The ones from extensions are mostly just 'best practices' in the extensions, as there are few
actual role requirements.

| Role Name | Source | Description                                                            |
| --------- | -------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | thumbnail | [Item Spec](item-spec/item-spec.md#asset-role-types) | An asset that represents a thumbnail of the item, typically a true color image (for items with assets in the visible wavelengths), lower-resolution (typically smaller 600x600 pixels), and typically a JPEG or PNG (suitable for display in a web browser). Multiple assets may have this purpose, but it recommended that the `type` and `roles` be unique tuples. For example, Sentinel-2 L2A provides thumbnail images in both JPEG and JPEG2000 formats, and would be distinguished by their media types. |

Reviewer: Let's not repeat all roles from the extensions here. Better Add a list that links to additional roles specified in extensions.

Author: I think it is useful to at least get a sense of what all the potential roles are in one list. But I can play with listing them quickly here but not having all the detail.

Reviewer: Maybe just a list?

* [SAR](extensions/sar/) (noise-power, amplitude, magnitude, ... [list all])
* EO...

Author: I added them to the table, but just one line for each with a list.

| beta0 | [SAR Extension](extensions/sar/README.md#best-practices) | Points to the radar backscatter file where data is referenced in the slant range plane and is radiometrically calibrated.  It is often derived from an `amplitude` or a `magnitude` role asset. |
| gamma0 | [SAR Extension](extensions/sar/README.md#best-practices)  | Points to the radar backscatter file where data is referenced in the plane perpendicular to the line of sight. It is often derived from an `amplitude` or a `magnitude` role asset. |
| date-offset | [SAR Extension](extensions/sar/README.md#best-practices) | Points to the date-offset file. |
| covmat | [SAR Extension](extensions/sar/README.md#best-practices) | Points to the Points to the Normalized Polarimetric Radar Covariance Matrix (CovMat) file. |
| prd | [SAR Extension](extensions/sar/README.md#best-practices) | Points to the Polarimetric Radar Decomposition (PRD) file. |

Some of the particular asset roles also have some best practices.

> ### Thumbnails

Reviewer: I thought we agreed on having a chapter that defines recommended sizes and formats for thumbnail, overview and visual? maybe don't say a lot in the table and add a link there to this chapter while extending this chapter with recommendation about thumbnails, overviews etc. in general?

Author: Yeah, I started this with the thumbnails, but then I didn't actually know what to recommend for the rest. I think this is the right spot for it.

Author: I'll add an issue, and then if someone fills in the actual recommendations on that issue I can do the PR to add them.

Reviewer: I thought we had some criteria defined in the last call. Can't exactly recall. Can you, @matthewhanson?

[acceptable to not register](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/29121241/custom-content-type-is-registering-with-iana-mandatory) 
it. It is relatively easy to [register](https://www.iana.org/form/media-types) a `vnd` media type.

### Asset Roles

[Asset roles](item-spec/item-spec.md#asset-roles) are used to describe what each asset is used for. They are particular useful 
when several assets have the same media type, such as when an Item has a multispectral analytic asset, a 3-band full resolution 

> visual asset, a downsampled overview, and an cloud mask, all stored as Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF's. It is recommended to use a role

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
visual asset, a down-sampled preview asset, and a cloud mask asset, all stored as Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF (COG) images. It is recommended to use a role
```

for every asset available, and just pick a sensible name for the role if there is not a clear one in the [Asset Role 
Types](item-spec/item-spec.md#asset-role-types). You can also propose new roles to the specification by raising an issue/PR. 

In addition to the thumbnail, data and overview [roles listed](item-spec/item-spec.md#asset-role-types) in the Item spec, there
are a number of roles that are emerging in practice, but don't have enough widespread use to justify standardizing them. So if
you want to re-use other roles then try to find them on the list below, and also feel free to suggest more to include here.

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mention their use in Extensions -- for example, we use (proprietarily) a role of `labels` on assets in Items using the Label Extension, and there's discussion of changing that spec to use this role instead of requiring the asset be named 'labels'

Author: Sounds good. Will add `labels` to the list, and mention extensions.

Author: Actually I don't think I'll add this yet, since right now it's not actually specified in the label extension. When #1001 is complete we can add it (or it can add it to this list if we merge this one first).

> #### List of Asset Roles

Reviewer 2: maybe this should be in item-spec.md?

Reviewer 2: oh, i see -- maybe make it clear that these are ideas for some, but aren't part of the blessed set of them in the spec.

Author: Sounds good, will work to clarify.

| Role Name | Description                                                                           |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | overview  | An asset that represents a possibly larger view than the thumbnail of the Item, for example, a true color composite of multi-band data. |

Reviewer 2: looks like `thumbnail` is missing from this list, but mentioned in the text above

| visual    | An asset that is a full resolution version of the data, processed for visual use (RGB only, often sharpened ([pan-sharpened](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pansharpened_image) and/or using an [unsharp mask](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unsharp_masking))). |
| reflectance | An asset the provides [reflectance](https://www.l3harrisgeospatial.com/Support/Self-Help-Tools/Help-Articles/Help-Articles-Detail/ArtMID/10220/ArticleID/19247/3377) values, instead of just radiance. |
| temperature | An asset that provides actual temperature measurements. |
| date | An asset that provides per-pixel acquisition timestamps, typically serving as metadata to another asset |
| saturation | Points to a file that indicates where pixels in the input spectral bands are saturated. |
| cloud | Points to a file that indicates whether a pixel is assessed as being cloud |

> | cloud-shadow | Points to a file that indicates whether a pixel is assessed as being cloud shadow. |

Reviewer 2: do we have the convention of using kebab-case for enums described anywhere in the spec?

Reviewer: No, I made this decision arbitrarily in the CARD4L extensions (where this list originates from).

Having that said, I'm not sure we should list these all here, but limit to things that seem generally used like cloud-cover, cloud-shadow, snow/ice, land/water, ... 
The issue with this list is that is only captures a small subset of use cases and could become **very* long or always incomplete. Some things are also very specific like date, date-offset, noise-power, gamma-sigma... backscatter, prd, covmat are specific products, but by no mean complete.

Author: Cool. I'm up for a more curated list. But I do want us to list a number of potentially relevant ones - I just didn't have enough knowledge of all the options to cut it down. I do think it's ok if it's a pretty long list, and if it's incomplete, just so people don't end up making their own things that are all slightly different.

| snow-ice | Points to a file that indicates whether a pixel is assessed as being snow/ice or not. |

> | land-water | Points to a file that indicates whether a pixel is assessed as being snow/ice or not land or water. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| land-water | Points to a file that indicates whether a pixel is assessed as being land or water. |
```

| incidence-angle | Points to a file with per-pixel incidence angles. |
| azimuth | Points to a file with per-pixel azimuth angles. |
| sun-azimuth | Points to a file with per-pixel sun azimuth angles. |
| sun-elevation | Points to a file with per-pixel sun elevation angles. |
| terrain-shadow | Points to a file that indicates whether a pixel is not directly illuminated due to terrain shadowing. |
| terrain-occlusion | Points to a file that indicates whether a pixel is not visible to the sensor due to terrain occlusion during off-nadir viewing. |
| terrain-illumination | Points to a file with coefficients used for terrain illumination correction are provided for each pixel. |
| mask | Points to a data mask file | 
| contributing-area | Points to the normalized scattering area file (typically used in SAR). |
| local-incidence-angle | Points to the local incidence angle file (typically used in SAR). |
| ellipsoid-incidence-angle | Points to the ellipsoid incidence angle file (typically used in SAR). |
| noise-power | Points to the noise power file (typically used in SAR). |

> | gamma-sigma | Points to the gamma-sigma file (typically used in SAR). |

Reviewer 3: related to the SAR, I would the following specific roles:
- amplitude (GRD)
- magnitude (SLC)
- coherence
- phase
- sigma0
- gamma0
- beta0
- displacement

> | date-offset | Points to the date-offset file (typically used in SAR). |

Reviewer: typically used in SAR is not really true. Although it originates in CARD4L SAR, this is rarely used in SAR and more related to composites.

Reviewer: Also, it feels like SAR is a second class citizen here as there is a "(typically used in SAR)", but not a "(typically used in Optical/EO)" or so for the ones that refer to spectral assets.

Reviewer 3: cant we have gamma, sigma and beta in separate roles?

Author: Cool, will update. And can add typically used in Optical/EO, I realized halfway through it'd be valuable to clarify that.
